# 🍅 Investigate privacy for synthetic single-cell RNA-seq

## Prerequisites

### Activate the environment

```bash
micromamba activate <environment>
```

### Generate a synthetic dataset
In order to re-produce the MIA methods, you first need a synthetic dataset. You can refer to [Blue team home page](/experiments/track_ii/1_generation/) for detailed instructions. 


## Defining privacy for synthetic single-cell gene expression dataset
- In single-cell RNA-seq data, we focus on **donor-level privacy**. The dataset is initially split into donor-based train and test sets, making it feasible to assess privacy at this level. To set up a **membership inference attack (MIA)**, we label samples (cells) from donors in the train set as 1 and those from donors in the test set as 0. After applying the MIA method, we aggregate the predictive scores per sample at the donor level and compute the AUROC and accuracy based on these **donor-level average scores**.

- Given the **high dimensionality** of the scRNA-seq dataset, we performed **subsampling** to create a simplified demonstration. Specifically, we randomly selected **50 donors** from both the train and test sets. The synthetic data generator (Poisson) was trained on the full train set, while the **subsampled train set** was used to guide the generation of synthetic data.

- To facilitate reproducibility, we provide the following resources on the [ELSA Benchmark website]() for download: 
  - the subsampled synthetic dataset: `distr_Poisson_subset_onek1k_annotated_synthetic.h5ad`
  - MIA labels: `onek1k_subset_mia_labels.csv`
  - the demonstration test dataset: `onek1k_subset_mia.h5ad`

- We acknowledge that this demonstration may not fully capture real-world scenarios. Therefore, we **strongly encourage participants to propose novel solutions** for investigating **donor-level privacy in synthetic single-cell datasets**. We are particularly interested in approaches that are not only **realistic** but also **memory- and compute-efficient**. Your innovative methods and insights will be crucial in advancing this important area of research. 🚀

## Running GAN-leaks and configurations
- Assuming you generated a synthetic dataset using the baseline pipeline, we provide a guideline to run the modified version of GAN-leaks (`gan_leaks`) provided by [DOMIAS package](https://github.com/holarissun/DOMIAS). In this modification, we introduced batching to enable faster GPU compute. 

-  ``attack_model`` parameter  inside the ``config.yaml`` is **by default** set as ``sc_domias_baselines``. This configuration will run `gan_leaks` against the generator defined in the ``generator_config``. 

- Please ensure that `config.yaml` is palced in the same directory where you are running your experiment. 

- :chart_with_upwards_trend:  Feel free to use relevant public datasets as a reference set in case your method depends on it. 


### Example: Running an attack on a synthetic (subsampled) data generated by Poisson 

In the below example, ``config.yaml`` runs ``domias_baselines`` attack models on the synthetic dataset generated by ``multivariate`` method for the given configuration  ``noise_0.5`` on ``TCGA-BRCA`` dataset. 

This assumes the existence of the synthetic data saved in the path ``/path/to/project/data_splits/TCGA-BRCA/synthetic/multivariate/noise_0.5``. You can modify the config according to your needs. 


```bash
.
.
.
dataset_config:
  name: "onek1k"
  membership_label_col: "membership"
  

attack_model: "sc_domias_baselines"

generator_config: 
  model_name: "sc_dist"
  experiment_name: "distr_Poisson_subset"
  

sc_domias_baselines_config:
  taxonomy: "bb" # not used provided as an example 
```

Then use the below script to run the method, 

```bash

# the above configuration assumes that the path to synthetic data is configured as below
# you can simply place the synthetic data you downloaded from Benchmark website under this directory
#synthetic_data_pth = /path/to/project/data_splits/onek1k/synthetic/sc_dist/distr_Poisson_subset

# /path/to/dataset/ >> path for the membership test dataset
# --mmb_labels_file /path/to/example/label/csv/  >>  path for the membership test labels CSV file 

python {src_dir}/mia/red_team.py run-singlecell-mia 
            /path/to/synthetic/data/  + "distr_Poisson_subset_onek1k_annotated_synthetic.h5ad"
            /path/to/dataset/ + "onek1k_subset_mia.h5ad"
            "experiment_sc_synthetic_data"
            --mmb_labels_file /path/to/example/label/csv/ + "onek1k_subset_mia_labels.csv"
```

- The script will generate an `evaluation_results.csv` under `/{home_dir}/results/mia/{dataset_name}/{attacker_name}/{generator_model}/{experiment_name}/{mia_experiment_name}` 

- In case ``--mmb_labels_file`` optional argument is not available, the code only saves the predicted membership scores. 


## Evaluation

Classification metrics, accuracy, AUC, and AUPR, is utilized to evaluate attack performances. We report here the MIA performances against some of the baseline generators, using the default parameter values provided in the [config.yaml](/experiments/track_i/blue_team/2_generation/config.yaml). 


#### Poisson

| Method      | Accuracy | AUCROC   | Average Precision  |
|-------------|----------|----------|--------------------|
| gan_leaks   | 0.50     | 0.5252   | 0.5636             |


