# ðŸ… RED TEAM 

Welcome to your home page! 

**Contents**
- [Tasks](#tasks)
- [Running and evaluating baseline methods](#yarn-guideline-for-running-and-evaluating-baseline-methods)
- [Guideline for developing your own method](#bookmark_tabs-guideline-for-developing-your-own-method-develop)
- [Submission checklist](#white_check_mark-submission-checklist)


## Tasks 
**Phase 1:**
- Red teams launch membership inference attacks (MIA) on the synthetic datasets, generated by the baseline methods. They will be able to download: 
  - Three synthetic datasets per RNA-seq dataset generated by the baseline generator methods. 
  - Baseline generator methods use the default parameter values in [Blue Team generator config.yaml](/experiments/blue_team/2_generation/config.yaml). 
  - A text file containing the information on which method is used to generate the corresponding synthetic data, and if a value of a parameter in the `config.yaml` is changed, is also provided during download. 

**Phase 2:**
- After the end of Phase 1, a set of Blue team solutions will be selected, based on their leaderboard performance as well as novelty of their methods.
- Red teams will launch MIA on Blue team solutions. 
 

## :yarn: Guideline for running and evaluating baseline methods 

[**Follow the guideline**](/experiments/red_team/1_mia/) for running baseline membership inference attack (MIA) methods and evaluating their performances against baseline generator methods. 

## :bookmark_tabs: Guideline for developing your own method 

We provide `BaseMIAModel` class inside [/src/mia/models/base.py)](/src/mia/models/base.py) for MIA models to inherit. This class handles the configuration arguments passed through `config.yaml`. 

It also has one abstract functions:  
- `run_attack(self) -> Dict[str, np.ndarray]:`, 
-  `evaluate_attack(self, scores: Dict[str, np.ndarray], labels: np.ndarray, file_name: str):()`, a fixed function that reports and saves the performance of MIA method in CSV file. 
-  `save_predictions(self, scores: Dict[str, np.ndarray]):`, a fixed function that saves the predicted membership scores in `scores` dictionary. `scores` dictionary stores e.g. `{synthetic_data_1: membership_prediction_probabilities}`. 

We expect your submitted code to follow the logic in [red_team.py](/src/mia/red_team.py). 


```python
## the outputs of the attack are always saved under
## /{home_dir}/results/mia/{dataset_name}/{attacker_name}/{generator_model}/{experiment_name}/{mia_experiment_name}
@click.command()
@click.argument('synthetic_file', type=click.Path(exists=True))
@click.argument('mmb_test_file', type=click.Path(exists=True))
@click.argument('mia_experiment_name', type=str, default="")
@click.option('--mmb_labels_file', type=click.Path(exists=True), default=None)
@click.option('--reference_file', type=click.Path(exists=True), default=None)
def run_mia(synthetic_file:str, 
            mmb_test_file:str, 
            mia_experiment_name:str = "",
            mmb_labels_file:str = None,
            reference_file:str = None):
    # Load the config file
    configfile = "config.yaml"
    config = yaml.safe_load(open(configfile))

    attack_model = config.get('attack_model')
    MIAClass = mia_classes.get(attack_model)

    if not MIAClass:
        raise ValueError(f"Unknown MIA model name: {attack_model}")

    mia_model = MIAClass(config, 
                         synthetic_file,
                         mmb_test_file,
                         mmb_labels_file,
                         mia_experiment_name,
                         reference_file)
    
    predictions, y_test = mia_model.run_attack()
    mia_model.save_predictions(predictions)

    if y_test is not None:
        mia_model.evaluate_attack(predictions, 
                                 y_test, 
                                "evaluation_results.csv")
    

```
Please test your code inside `run_mia` function to ensure its reproducibility. 


## :white_check_mark: Submission checklist 
The following files are required for submission, for each dataset:

1. Modified [red_team.py](/src/mia/red_team.py) with your MIA class included, and other necessary `.py` files to run your method.
2. Updated `config.yaml` file containing `{your_attack_model}_config` 
3. Predictions in CSV format, following the below file name format:
    - `synthetic_data_1_predictions.csv`
    - `synthetic_data_2_predictions.csv`
    - `synthetic_data_3_predictions.csv`
4. `environment.yaml` to reproduce the experiments

This means we expect two zip files from you, strictly in the below filename format:
1.  `redteam_{yourteamname}_TCGA-BRCA.zip`
2. `redteam_{yourteamname}_TCGA-COMBINED.zip`

Please take look at the [example submission zip file](/experiments/red_team/redteam_example_TCGA-BRCA.zip) to double check correct formatting. 


**Best of luck!** :four_leaf_clover:
